How did you identify those specific individuals?
Oh, look at that.
Now, do you want another, this is another story, too.
Remember the fellow who was in charge of the registrar's office, Lloyd Heaton, was it?
Mm-hmm.
Heaton, as an old-time Aggie, couldn't understand why economics, anything in the social sciences, anything in the arts, or what have you, could be really important.
Engineering, mathematics, that was the name of the game with Lloyd Heaton.
And he had an unbelievable impact on approving of courses.
Remember this, Hansel?
Oh, I remember the battles that I had with Lloyd and the games I did play with him.
Sometime I'm going to write a little book, the games I played.
Anyway, I learned quickly with Lloyd Heaton
and hence the background of A&M, its engineering background, its agricultural to some extent, that if we're going to make economics critical,
I've got to indicate how mathematically the prime economists are.
I mean, we were becoming more and more mathematically oriented from about the late 50s on.
In fact, Haskell, when I took my doctorate, as I mentioned, I started right after the war and finished in 51,
I had to pass two language exams, one which is almost automatic because of military background in French, other was German, and the German boys, you talk of luck.
If you want me to backtrack on luck on German, oh gosh, I've got so many stories, I could keep you here until midnight.
And I mean just the good Lord's blessings.
I'll backtrack quickly on this one.
So you understand why I was successful as an economist, not brilliance, but by luck.
A little church.
Auburn, Alabama, Lutheran Church, we invited a German to come over to our church and spend time with us, study at Auburn, and learn what America was like.
This was in 1948, shortly after the war, two years beyond, two and a half beyond.
This fellow came over, and I met him, and I had to pass my German exam.
I wasn't doing too well learning German, though I did have some time in which I frankly, thank heaven, had some of Mammel's people as PWs under me.
I'm learning German.
I've got this German student.
Our church is paying his way.
I worked out a deal with him.
I said, Mr. Ladd, I'll help you with your economics course.
He's taking it at Auburn.
You help me with translating this book that I got a hold of by August Lerch, The Spatial Economy.
The German writers in economics were fantastic in terms of location economics, which had been my dissertation, and now spatial economics, as they were calling it, but no one else in the world called it that.
And this fellow helped me translate August Lerch's book.
before it had ever been translated.
And to me the greatest mind that I've ever studied directly out of, or indirectly I should say out of, was this book by August Lerch.
It gave me the greatest break in the world because I started publishing articles that no American had read before about a man that no American, other than a handful of those who maybe came over from Europe, were able to read and didn't read much about August Lerch.
To me, besides getting the misdelivered orders during the Korean War, which saved my soul, in fact, or kept me in academia or kept me home, reading and having this German student help me with German.
So I went through the whole book with this boy.
He was fascinated by it as well as I was.
In fact, this economist, August
on page 202 of at least the book that I saw in German was saying, and when we defeat the Soviet Union we will carve them up in this network of hexagons which I have described over the last five chapters or whatever.
In other words, the book was being dedicated to Adolf as when we win the war, here's the way we're going to create a wonderful economy out of that vast Union called the Soviet Union.
So here I've got a head start on virtually every American economist and English economist by having read the entirety.
I read the entirety because I got fascinated with it and I had this German student who was equally fascinated and also taking economics and enjoying his stay in the United States.
It led me into a series of articles.
at a journal, but guess what?
The editor was a German, Schwenning, who was so thrilled to find that Americans, and he himself had been German,
that Americans would be reading what German economists had been writing, that I almost had automatic acceptances.
Oh, Haskell, I've been lucky.
I've been so lucky, and the older I get, the more you make me think back of things.
All of this is luck.
All right.
Who helped identify, or did you identify Charlie Ferguson, and who identified the specific individuals?
One of my first good articles in my academic career after the doctorate was with a fellow named Bill Fouts.
Who was Bill?
He was a professor in North Carolina.
So Bill Fouts and I wrote this article together on spatial economics.
Bill was sort of interested in it, but not learned about August Lerch.
And who's his favorite student?
Charles Ferguson.
And I'm up in North Carolina because I mentioned that they wanted me on their faculty and I instead went to Florida State.
Anyway, I'm up there in North Carolina thinking about going to North Carolina, and Ms.
Charles Ferguson walks into Bill Fouts' office, and Bill and I are chatting, and Bill introduces me to the cleverest, brightest PhD candidate he's ever had.
And so I met Charlie Ferguson, and a year or two later I met him at a convention, got to like the man, and ultimately I'm here at A&M.
And Charlie, by this stage of the game, is now a full prophet at Michigan State, so it was a matter of luck.
I knew Charles Ferguson, liked him greatly.
I knew he was basically from Arkansas, a southerner.
And he and I had a nice rapport.
So how did I identify Charlie?
I was lucky I met Charlie through Bill Fouts.
What about Tom Savings?
Tom Savings was a real close friend of Charles Ferguson at Michigan State.
I'd also been a visiting professor in the summertime at Michigan State.
I went up there because one of our kids, our son John, had a chance for the Olympics.
And the coach at Michigan State in swimming
was a prospective Olympic coach on swimming.
So Michigan State had offered me a job in the summertime if I wanted it, and I grabbed it rather than stay in Tallahassee.
And we took our whole family up so that John could swim under the McChesney, and I had arranged for that in taking the job.
And Michigan State being there, who's there?
Charles Fergus, Dom Saving, Bob Lanzelotti.
This leads me to another thought, if I could go on a tangent.
John Mavoni, another fellow who we attracted here.
John and I knew each other at Florida State.
John had just gotten his doctorate out of Duke, a young professor, and I introduced him to Bob Lanzolotti at a party or something like that, and next thing I know, John is up at Michigan State also.
So there was a convention going on in New Orleans
And John's wife lives in New Orleans, and so he used his wife's home to have a party for the Southern Economic Association friends of his, namely guys from Michigan State, and a few others at this party.
And at that party, guess who's there but Charlie Ferguson and Tom Saving.
And as John Allen said it at this roasting, or John Maloney rather said it at the roasting, he said, I had just been told by Bob Lanzalotti, who was at this party, that you're being favorably considered for tenure at Michigan State, and here Mel Greenhead is stealing the two best men we've got, Charles Ferguson and Tom Saving, and by gosh, when I learned what had happened that Mel grabbed him at
the party that I'm throwing at my wife's family home in New Orleans.
Mill has taught those two fellows into visiting at A&M, and by gosh they're going to A&M.
I'm going to lose my tenure.
So I fell into a lot of lucky occasions such as that one.
In what, in those early years,
In what areas of economics was the department?
Oh, I lost you two.
I was on Lloyd Heaton and that.
What happened, when I was able to recruit Bob Baseman, Bob was in econometrics.
And econometrics is a lot of mathematics.
And again, the whole profession, instead of, oh, PhDs in economics, by the end of the 50s, you didn't have to take two languages and pass them anymore.
No such thing as the French-German combination.
You have to pass a mathematics exam.
And typically in rather advanced calculus, including not only differential and ellenical, but even optimal control theory and stuff.
So economists were going more and more towards mathematics.
Of course, here I'm talking in the 60s already, that we're here at A&M, and economists were becoming somewhat erudite in their mathematical backgrounds.
Lloyd Heaton thinks in terms of engineering.
I'm trying to get courses approved, a PhD program, among other things.
I'm running into a blank wall, one that Earl Rutter hadn't paid for me as well as most of them, and these courses were dragging on getting approval.
Part of my deal with Wayne Hall and Earl, and I don't know how much Wayne was involved on the deal, was something like for every five masses candidates that I could bring to the department,
I could hire one junior professor, assistant professor, maybe associate, but basically assistant, for every three PhD candidates, and this is now a little bit after we got the PhD approved out of, I think Jack Williams was involved in Boston, out of every three
PhDs that I could bring in, so I'm recruiting grad students at the same time when I was going around the state giving lectures at even the women's college up in Denton.
Anyway, for about every three PhD candidates I could go after a senior professor.
So we're knocking out, I'm knocking myself out to get major graduate students
And then, as a result, being able to hire top quality young men and older men.
Young men, I guess I'd have to include Phil Graham, though I'm a little upset over some things he's done recently.
Chuck Maurice, Bob Eaklin, many others, and top guys like Fuhrer Bodden, Baseman, Saving, Ferguson, and the like.
Anyway, Lloyd Heaton is a stumbling block.
I'm not getting the courses approved.
So I finally visited with him.
I said, gee whiz, Lloyd, don't you realize what we're doing in economics?
We're converting the old department that you used to know.
This is a mathematical department.
He said, well, what do you mean by this course?
I said, this course in econometrics?
I said, and I tried to explain.
He said, well, why call it econ?
I said, I don't know.
It's just history.
We're used to calling this.
It comes out of the economics department.
We could call it anything else.
He said, I'll call it econometrics.
I said, well, we've got one of these courses.
He said, I mean, label it differently.
Look in the catalog.
I suspect it's still the same.
ECMT.
standing not for econ but for econometrics.
Well if that's all he needed to approve my courses, I said fine, let's call it ECMT.
So I even created other ECMT courses which are more mathematical econ than they are econometrics.
Did you play those games as president?
I bet you did.
Let's see.
You mentioned there was one senior faculty member you went after and didn't get.
All right.
These junior faculty members, how did you find Eakland and Graham and Reese?
Well, Eakland came out of LSU, so I stole after I'd gone there to visit.
I met this young fellow, and he was only getting his doctorate out of there.
So I really did not raid Bill Ross.
That would be dirty as could be.
I don't mind raiding at John Mulroney's party.
That was fair game, you know.
But no, I didn't raid LSU, but they were turning out this Bob Eaklin, and I asked Bill, who's your best grad student?
And Bill had, as I mentioned earlier, been a long-time friend of mine, he and Bernie Sligar.
And they said Bob Eakland is about the best we've had in a decade.
So I talked Bob into coming here.
Bob's family are from San Antonio.
Kyle Vader's family, if I recall, were also from San Antonio.
Fergie was Arkansas.
We're trying to find people who would not... Where is Eklund now?
Do you know?
Yeah, he's, oh gosh, it's in some ways sad from my standpoint.
He's got a chair, top professor at Auburn.
At Auburn, okay.
But he's retiring and he's a kid yet.
He's only in his late 50s.
He wants to go to Paris and become a painter.
And he's earned enough money apparently to follow that.
I don't know if he's yet retired, but that was the last letter I had from him that he was going to do that.
Anyway and Phil Graham?
Yes.
A fellow named sort of like my name, Green, Jim Green at U of Georgia was an old friend of mine, and I contacted him.
I wanted to get some frankly cheap guys, by which I mean fellows who I didn't have to pay their expenses to come here.
I had to use all expenses.
to wheel and deal the basements and others because they expected to be treated royally before they would consider coming to Texas A&M.
And they were just learning that, gee whiz, they're apparently doing things in the Department of Econ and
Maybe they heard, and frankly our math department was starting to grow if you recall back then.
I think Earl was backing math or Wayne Hall maybe.
Math was doing well and of course chemistry.
And see chemistry was getting through Andy Settle and the Wells Foundation, they got Al Cotton.
And Al is still one of my hopes to get a nice Nobel in his lifetime.
Anyway, Jim Green at Georgia, being an old buddy of mine, I said, Jim, don't recommend anyone to me unless you know these fellows or this fellow will be outstanding academicians.
And if you want to have a good enemy, recommend someone who's bad.
I hire him.
He proves to be bad.
Watch out.
Watch out for me.
Mel, I wouldn't do that to anyone, much less you.
I've got two fellas, Chuck Maurice, Phil Graham.
If you could talk those fellas into going A&M, you'll never regret it.
So I landed up with Chuck and Phil through a friend of mine, Jim Green.
All right, and you hired them both right out of graduate school.
Can I, oh gosh, go ahead.
And I was going to say, I presume that you paid competitive salaries to get them.
Yes.
Oh yes, we were being, the word around the country was, they'll pay you
what you think you're worth if they think you're worth it.
Chuck Maurice at this roasting had a wonderful remark.
He claims, I doubt that this really took place.
I don't think I would do it, but he claimed, and it's on tape, that when I first got to A&M, I said, well, Dr. Greenhut, I want you to know I am now Dr. Maurice.
He said that I said, well, it's a good thing for you, otherwise you'd be canned quickly.
What advice did you give young faculty members like that as they're starting?
What advice did you give them when they got here?
Publish and don't destroy your teaching abilities.
Make sure you do wear a coat and tie.
Actually, John says,
He was the one who had to give that bad message, and others of equivalent kind.
I don't think I used my messenger that much, but John Allen will say I did.
Maybe I did.
Right now.
I told him that this was, as I know, a pretty straight-laced school with a lot of military background, and some of the men out of this university were fantastic soldiers.
And I had trouble with one that I won't mention.
I didn't have trouble, but Earl would have had trouble with one that I had brought in.
Tell me how much you, if you remember, tell me about Phil Graham getting started in politics.
This involved, I was invited to give a talk, I think it was to the Rotary Club, and this friend of mine, Jim Blackman at NSF,
I said, boy, your application for funds here for the department, besides that I had my own application for my own research.
He said, this departmental thing looks pretty darn good.
Why don't you come up here and visit and I'll take you around and have you meet some of the other people who are going to be involved.
And it'd be worth a while, really, Mel.
In other words, he's trying to tell me, you guys want a million dollars out of NSF.
You've got a good chance.
Can you get up here next week?
Oh, my gosh, the answer is, yes, I'm going up.
And then I realized I've got, I'd already promised the Rotary Club I'd be an after-dinner speaker.
And I've got to find someone, I guess, in place where I'll call up the man who, I forget who it was who invited me.
And I told him that I was going to be there.
He said, well, get someone in your place, would you?
Well, I went to my senior professors, like Tom and others, and they were not interested in, that's your job, Mel.
You keep up the goodwill around town.
Don't bother me.
And each one of them, so I thought, well, by gosh, I'd better go down to my assistant professor level.
And I asked Phil Graham.
I said, Phil, I've heard that you enjoy
talking, would you enjoy giving an afternoon talk to the Rotary Club?"
Oh, yes, yes, Mel, I'd love to.
Well, I got back from D.C.
about a week or so or two later, whenever it was, and I called up the fellow who had invited me, and I said, well, I sure hope things worked out well.
How did Phil do?
And the answer I got, frankly, a very hurtful one, well, Mel, if we ever make the mistake of inviting you again, send Phil in your place.
So Phil apparently hit them beautifully as a public speaker.
Next thing I knew from Philly, he thought he wanted to run for politics.
And would I help him?
Because part of my job obviously at A&M was not only to bring in faculty, students, and try to keep things going, and one of the biggest problems was keeping the teaching going the way it had been.
I know we do a bunch of publish and perish guys, teachers, effectively, as fellows who may be more dedicated to the undergraduate student.
But in any event, part of my job was also to glad hand around town and get to know everyone who might really help the university and the department, in effect.
So I didn't know Bob Bernath and Ford Allbidden and all of those fellas.
In fact, Martha and Mari were constant golfers together.
So I said, okay, Phil, I'd be happy to help you go on a political career.
I'll get all the people that I think are wealthy in the community to see if you could, in effect, through a party or two at my house, get funds.
And that's the way it started as far as my collection is concerned.
And he did impress everyone at the house.
And one thing that I knew was going to be good, Phil was fundamentally conservative.
I say fundamentally because some of the stuff I know that fellow's been sponsoring in Washington is a complete negation of the pure principles of conservative economics.
He's a politician now, unfortunately, like all of them become, and I'm sure in the way I played the game,
At A&M I was a politician in my own right, though I like to believe that I'm still the same conservator as I am.
At this roasting, by the way, real funny, I don't know how Jim Griffin did this one to me, but he got a letter apparently signed by Bill Clinton that he was sorry he could not be at this roasting.
And so Jim Griffin's remark was, well, we all thought Mel was a real conservative, but he's really a closet Democrat.
And Phil started out as a Democrat.
Yes.
And he ran first for the Senate?
For the Senate.
He ran against that big guy, Lloyd Benson.
Lloyd Benson.
Did that create any awkwardness in the department that here was a candidate for public office?
No one, I never picked, you probably heard a lot more than he did in this regard.
No, I don't know.
Did he take leave to campaign?
Gee, Haskell, you're scratching my memory too much.
I don't believe he did.
I don't believe he needed leave.
Now, you know, you actually surprised me, something that I just, well, at this stage of the game I was no longer department head, by the way.
I don't believe.
So I never did know that he was missing a lot of classes.
This is in the 70's isn't it that Phil was, see I gave up the hardship out of that interview with Earl Budda based on the LSU thing in 1969.
Oh okay.
The professorship that I wanted.
So you were department head for?
For three years only.
Three years.
But they were hectic three.
Oh, I hear you.
I hear you.
Let's go back.
Describe what it was like for you and your family to get settled into Bryan College Station as a place to live.
Fantastic.
As John Allen, I'm going to use him to give you an idea, John said he was so unbelieving about what was going on here.
He's just getting his doctorate.
He's a nobody.
And who picks him up at the airport?
The president of one of the local banks.
And what does the president of the local bank do?
He says, I'm supposed to take you to the greenhouse.
They're having a party for a bunch of people.
I think you will really enjoy going to that party, so Mel said for me to bring you there."
And John said, when I went in the party, who's there but the Chancellor of the University, or the President of the University rather, Earl Rutter, and department heads, deans, some members of the Board of Trustees?
He said, I was so floored, I couldn't believe that everyone was behind Econ, and surely they weren't there to meet me, of course.
But I was completely captivated by it all.
That's true of me.
Mari and I had, the minute we hit town, between Stan Steven and Ridley Biggs, remember them, and Travis Bryan and others, we were being honored so wonderfully.
Can we do anything for you?
Finally I remember we were having some difficulty getting GTE to give us a phone system quickly.
I forget which one of those I called.
Bingo!
We had the phone system in that same day.
So things that we normally, a new person moving into town could not do for himself, the way this community was responding, and this was not to me, because I was the recipient of it, Maui was the recipient of it, either Earl Butter, Wayne Hall,
Some people at A&M, some group, I don't know how it happened, but they had Stan Stevens over the years, Ridley Biggs, et cetera, you know all of them, Dennis Gehring subsequently, all backing
everything that was happening here.
What about the schools and your children?
How did that transition go?
Well, even that went too good.
Our son John was offered a swimming scholarship at Florida State.
Our daughter Peggy was already at Florida State when we moved here.
Art Adamson, was that our swimming coach I think?
When I mentioned to him, boy my son is going to be swimming for Bim Stolzer over at Florida State, he said, we've never had a full-time, full scholarship for a swimmer yet.
We only give scholarships for football, basketball, things like that.
But maybe I could work it.
Next thing I knew, John was offered a full-time swimmer.
a scholarship for swimming.
John said, no I'm going to stay at Florida State or go to Florida State.
I said, no son, you're coming here.
So everything fell into place.
And mind you, I don't mind claiming that I did a lot as a catalyst for bringing in basements and others.
But the climate was unbelievable back in those days.
The climate for success
I don't know the story of the fellas in chemistry.
I know what was going on in the math because one of the great needs I personally had was for a better math department.
And I think the math department was then starting to blossom and bloom.
And the bankers in town, for some reason, whether someone here at the university, it must have been Erlwetter or some members of the Board of Trustees, and it'd be good if you were trying to find out because you put a finger on something I hadn't thought about.
Murray and I, when we moved into town, by gosh, we were honored citizens before they even knew us.
We could have been the world's greatest jerks, but we were being honored the minute we arrived.
So someone had prepared these people that we didn't know from Adam that we're moving some pretty fine people into academia here at A&M and we would appreciate your whining and dining them and showing them around.
And that sure did happen to us.
And my little daughter who went to school, she was just a natural going into school and I don't think anything special, but she was happy.
And in spite of leaving her old assistant in Tallahassee and stuff like that.
Were there any, as you arrived and then as you were department head, did any key former students or regents attempt to give you advice?
But I did get calls in terms of board of directors and I said I'm too busy, I can't be interested right now, but I'm honored.
So even former students were involved by someone.
Now this, what I'm talking about, board of directors, may have been about two years after we were here, so already the story was going.
Boy, econ is going.
So maybe that may not have reflected some angels, shall I say, for the university.
What about politics?
Did the governor or any members of the legislature, did they help or hinder?
Ben Barnes, I think, was lieutenant governor at the time.
I think someone had a party for him.
I don't recall exactly who it was.
Mari Wood, she remembers things so much better than I do on this level.
But anyway, we were at this party that was honoring Ben Bond.
We met him.
There was a long line.
Everyone walked by and shook his hand in his wife's hand.
And I joined the Century Club, Earl rather thought I should.
And so I had special seating at the football game and we're going down at this football game down this row and who's there but Ben Barnes next to Earl and Margaret Rudder.
And Earl starts saying, well Ben I want you to, oh I know Mel Greenhut.